You guys will come back to the course.
So in this lecture we're going to talk a little bit more about putting together complex proposals.
Now remember complex proposals are the proposals we looked at in our previous lecture.
Those are the ones that have multiple pages.
They're the ones that are typically going to be made for larger projects or projects that you take more
seriously now.
Every single one of you out there is going to have a different strategy when it comes to proposals and
that's perfectly fine.
I always suggest that you find what works for you but there's probably going to be a an occasion or
a situation where you're going to want to make a formal long form proposal.
So in this lecture we're going to cover what exactly goes into those what you should expect.
What are some of the optional things you can include.
And we're going to wrap it up.
I'm going to show you some tools that you can use to make the process go a lot smoother.
OK.
Do you remember from the previous lecture where we talked OK.
Do you remember from the previous lecture where I showed you an example of a formal proposal that we
had received I had received a very long time ago that one was from Octa going to pull it up real quickly
to give you a refresher.
All right.
So here was now this is a great example of what a formal proposal looks like it has all of the same
sections and all of the same kind of formal attitude that you would expect out of a formal proposal.
I just wanted to bring it up to give you a refresher of what I mean when I mean by formal proposals
these are the ones that you typically give to corporate clients or big projects.
Now pretty much in every single case there are going to be at least six things included in the proposal
and I've listed out the six that you almost always will see and there are things that I suggest you
always put.
Now there's a couple other optional things and we'll talk about in a second.
But these are the absolute minimum that you should include.
So the first thing is about you.
Now if you saw that on the previous one they have an entire section about who they are how they work
what they choose to do how they like to present themselves in a little bit of information of who they've
worked for before.
Now the reason why you add to this is you need to get your potential client some idea of who you are
as a person.
Now having a human element is always a good thing.
If they have the feeling that this proposal was churned out by a robot and it says nothing about the
person that is proposing it or the company those proposing it they're going to be much less inclined
to feel attached to that person or that proposal.
It kind of comes off as cold transactional almost entirely to business related.
So a lot of times what we see is people will include information about them.
It says Hey I'm a person I am real this is about me.
And often this is used as an opportunity to kind of highlight some of the good things you've done some
of the things that you would normally brag about some of your resume top stories.
Now typically what you'll see is this is going to be a page that goes over a page that's excessive.
OK.
That means that you're kind of distracted.
That means you really need to hone it in.
You shouldn't be talking about yourself that much too early.
Now you can also have it ashore as half a page.
That's perfectly fine if you want to keep it short and condensed and you want to push off more information
later into the proposal.
I generally suggest you go with the industry standard which is one.
OK.
Now is the second component worth discussing is an overview of the project.
Now I listed about you at the top as number one because typically this is something you going to see
at the very beginning of proposals.
Now it's obviously not always the case.
Sometimes we'll see it at the very end as an afterthought.
But typically you want to at the beginning because you want it to be something that your client reads
first.
If you put at the very end and you put all the information about their project in the middle there's
a very good chance they don't even get to the end and you won't be able to frame the way that they look
at this proposal by explaining to them how good you are and all the things you've done and things about
you.
So it's a good idea to put it first.
Now a second component is the overview of the project.
Now this is something that you might have noticed that some people leave out and it's something I strongly
suggest you put in what you're doing and an overview of the project is going to put something that is
it could be a paragraph or could it be two paragraphs or even that be as long as a page what you're
doing is you are pitching the project back to the client.
Now if you remember previously in our subcontracting strategy sections if you guys are coming from my
outsourcing courses we have a lecture where we talk about the technique called repeating the project
back to you and basically what that means and then in the dynamic of hiring a contractor is that you
want to make sure that that person understands what exactly they're building.
And one of the ways you can do that is by asking them to repeat it back to you then you can kind of
analyze how they explained it how well they understand it.
Are there any missing gaps in their knowledge and so that concept works the exact same way.
When you give an overview of the project you're trying to show them that hey I know how your project
works.
I know what it is I know your problems are.
I'm pitching it back to you to show you how well I understand your project.
Now obviously this can backfire and a lot of times what you'll notice is people will shorten it because
they just simply do not know enough about the context of the project that they're going to be working
on.
And that can be kind of tricky if you make it too short and too and detailed it can actually have the
opposite effect where it seems like the person simply doesn't know anything about the project at all.
Now now if you're already in the mix and you've already been taking in clients and doing some development
work you probably know that a lot of times we'll be submitting proposals and you don't really understand
who the target client is what they do.
How does this project fit into the wider context of their company.
So that was usually tricky and that's something that you might have to do some background research to
get right you might have to go to their Web site or read about them get a better understanding of what
it you might need to incorporate more questions about like why do they want to make changes or why do
they want to build this.
What are the issues that they're facing.
What are the issues that they're trying to fix.
Like asking them at the end of your correspondence whether or not you have all of your assumptions correct
just saying hey can you help me for a second.
This is what I think the problem is.
Just correct me if I'm wrong.
Now third component you'll see that I strongly assess you add is how you work now.
If you are someone that's going to be using agile.
This is a great opportunity to explain what that is and why it's a benefit.
Now this is something that works out for us really really well because being able to explain agile is
a great opportunity to explain all of the benefits of agile.
Now you need to be able to explain what the benefits are to have this kind of bonus effect.
So it might be something that you need to practice if you are going to work in an agile manner.
Now if you're not going be using Agile or you are going to be using some of the other things that are
good or efficient about the way that you do work this is where you're going to describe your individual
step by step process and explain how you intake information you're going explain how you're going to
be updating them.
You probably will explain what technologies you're going to use.
This is where you typically will explain what your philosophies are about work or what strategies you
personally like to use now how you work is almost always a sales opportunity.
This is where you say that we are sophisticated and cutting edge or you say I use common sense when
I do my work schedule or my work schedules really relaxed or it's really professional.
This is typically somewhere where you're going to try to put in some form of your individual messaging
and previously in the course we talked all up and down about picking what message works for your target
client base and picking what matches you yourself who you are what you want to get out of this.
Once you figured that out you'll be able to start working this better.
So plan on you know your first couple of complex proposals.
It might be something that you're kind of making up on the fly when it comes to how you work and how
you see work.
But don't waste this opportunity to explain your process.
It will also help with communication so that when they do accept your project they will understand what
are the next steps.
It's not something whether in the dark constantly asking you what are we doing next.
OK so timeline timeline is pretty obvious this is where you just list off how long the project's going
to take.
This is something that if you leave out I think you make a pretty big mistake if you're giving someone
a complex proposal.
It should be complete.
You shouldn't be sending off a well-polished PDAF that doesn't say how long this project is going to
take unless in some weird situation you have a client who absolutely doesn't care about the timeline.
I think even in that case you probably want to give them some basis of how long you think this is going
to take and maybe you can use a range.
Personally I like to get as detail as possible timelines but obviously be mindful of the fact that you
can hamstring yourself.
You can actually set yourself up for failure if you give too much detail and then you get into the project
and realize that a lot of that was inaccurate.
It's very very hard to forecast these things so try to be as detailed as possible as you can.
At the same time don't make any estimates you think are going to be a problem later.
So the fifth one obviously is price.
And if you listen to previous lecture where I talked about how we break down our estimates I obviously
suggest that you try to break down your price as much as possible when you give a complex proposal to
someone they're going to send it to other people.
People are going to see that and the number one page they are most interested in is price.
They're going to look at that they're going to try to dissect it.
They're kind of try to pick and compare your sections that other people.
So try not to be too vague.
Say of one development firm sends a proposal that says this project's going to cost $15000 and that's
it they just give a line that say total project or you have another one compared to that where they
say the same thing 15000 but they break it down and they explain what section costs the most what individual
technology integration is going to cost the most or what specific actions or tasks are going to take
up the most of the budget.
In that scenario you're almost always going to go with the one that gave you more clarity gave you more
information you're gonna feel more confident about that person.
There's always kind of a negative association with people who are too vague when it comes to estimates.
If I give one big price or just two prices or broken down a couple of ways.
As a Pitts as a client they might feel as if you're trying to pull something on them or trying to hide
costs that are either outside of their budget or you simply do not know enough about to give a real
asset.
And if that's the case and if it is the case you don't know enough to give a real estimate you shouldn't
be making a complex proposal to begin with.
You should be getting more information before the step.
Now number seven is next steps and I think this is something that's crucial and it gets left out almost
all the time.
Next step is what you put at the very end.
You say if you accept this proposal this is exactly what we're going to do.
This is where you talk about what are your payment terms.
This is the way you talk about what when you need payment in regard to when you work and when you're
going to deliver it.
This is where you're going to tell them what deliverables you need specifically if you need graphic
design files this is where you tell them exactly when you need it.
This is really really helpful because a lot of times people say yes this is great let's start but they
don't know what's going to happen next.
So next steps helps them say hey we're ready to roll.
We can start working on this as soon as you give us the green light.
And you want them to have that feeling.
You want them to feel as if it's just up to them everything's ready to go.
Now the last thing is disclaimers and this is just something that you will get better at over time.
Disclaimers will be kind of all over the proposal but this is really where I will say things like if
this changes then the estimate will change or if this happens and the timeline might change.
And basically you just kind of protect yourself in the case that you make a you make a statement and
it doesn't end up being exactly true.
Now the most important thing to put a disclaimer for in my experience.
So it's very very important though when you have a price you say on the price page if any new features
are added or any process in this proposal is changed.
Then we need to re-evaluate the price because that will also change.
You would be surprised how many clients don't actually realize that and don't actually know that this
project that this price you're giving them covers everything they could possibly imagine and not just
specifically what they describe to you.
So you need to make sure that you include that other things worth putting disclaimers on I'd say it's
really important on the timeline.
If you say that if you identify any type of integrations or technologies that you're not 100 percent
familiar with it's worth putting a disclaimer saying that you know your timeline is based on you assuming
that it's reasonable and easy to implement.
And if it ends up being the case that it's not that you would say that it could be the case the timeline
is delayed just so they know that there's a couple little sections in this project that could potentially
blow up and become something much much larger.
So if you have a client who has a strict deadline a strict kind of a strict timetable for this project
and you put that that signals to them that hey this is a project that you cannot time perfectly doesn't
matter who else is going to make it.
Just different technologies.
You always run into problems and you're always potentially end up taking more time.
That's something that you need to plan for in your own kind of project timeline.
All right and quickly we're going to wrap up with what are some of the optional components of proposals.
You'll probably see this.
If you've ever gotten a lot of estimates from firms you've worked with a lot of Freelancer these are
the two main ones that I identify that are worth considering putting in.
But it really just kind of depends on who you are how you work and what your situation is.
So we'll cover these pretty briefly.
So number one is case studies.
This is something you'll see a lot of time.
You'll see these long PTF and sometimes it'll be a 10 page NPF and five pages will be case studies that
they've attached.
Now Case studies are a powerful tool for convincing your client that you know what you're doing.
You've worked with really strong reputable brands or even just to show off what you're capable of.
But now the question of whether or not you would add a case study into your proposal really really just
depend in my personal opinion.
It's very rare that I've seen case studies be added to a proposal and it's actually a benefit.
Typically what it ends up doing is it just bloats the proposal makes a proposal way too long.
It makes the odds that your client finishes the entire thing much much lower and a lot of times it's
just frankly a distraction.
I love case studies.
I think they're great.
I think it's something that you need to put on your website or you might want to put it somewhere in
a PTF or a package that you deliver to clients that are interested in your portfolio or interested in
who you are and how you work but not specifically asking for a proposal yet.
The one exception to this where I've seen case studies work well is where you add one or two case studies
that are specifically relevant to what they're doing.
So if you're trying to build an application and you worked on one previously that was very very similar
and in a number of different dimensions then it's absolutely something you could add.
You could say we built this project.
It worked out so well.
You know if the client said this about it they are so happy about us.
This is clearly something that we've worked on before.
That is a very very powerful thing.
If you can do that now now what you need to be careful though of is adding a case study that has nothing
to do with the project if you had a case study that has nothing to do with the project then you actually
will have a problem because it is a distraction and it also shows that you probably don't understand
their project very well.
So case studies you can add them if you have some.
But make sure that it's relevant if it's relevant and it's really really relevant.
Then it'll be good but if it's not something that's relevant to what they're building or at least the
relevancy is not obvious that it's actually going to distract it's actually ends up making it look like
the proposal you gave them is not very customized or that the person who made the proposal didn't or
didn't really think about what they were delivering very much at all.
OK and so the last thing is development contracts.
This is the last thing you will see quite frequently a lot of times in proposals.
Firms or freelancers and developers will add in the contract into it.
Now the reason why people do that is they think it's a convenience right.
So if someone's happy about the proposal they say yes this is great.
Then they have the contract right there ready to go.
I emphatically say no don't do that.
It's not something I've ever seen work.
Well what ends up happening is you have a five page proposal six page proposal on your development contract
could be four to five pages.
You've doubled the length with some really really wordy legal leaves attachment that doesn't add value
to your proposal.
The point of your proposal is to convince the client that you are the best option for this project.
It's a convince them that you know what you're doing.
You thought about their project you have the necessary skills and potentially you've done it before
if you don't have a case.
I think a development contract doesn't do that.
It distracts from that.
Contracts are something that you're going to discuss once you've already got to the point where they
say yes I want to work with you.
One of the problems with development contracts is that people naturally are going to have a mild allergic
reaction to contracts.
If you've ever seen a contract and signed it how often have you signed a contract yourself where you
felt completely at ease when you signed your signature.
That's because contracts are complicated contracts include a lot of things that are not easy to understand
and a lot of different use cases are baked into that you've never heard of and you don't know what you're
signing up.
You're signing yourself up to the last thing I'll say about that is we talked about previously about
minimizing friction with your clients when you're giving them a proposal you do want to minimize friction
the way you do that is by limiting how much unnecessary information you give them by making it easy
for them to get back to you by making it easy for them to know what exactly starts next.
What are the next steps and exactly what you need from them.
Now adding a development contract just is the opposite of that.
Now all of a sudden you have a proposal that could be read in five to 10 minutes you had a development
contract and it's going to take them 30 to 45 minutes to completely read it and understand it.
It just doesn't it doesn't make sense.
It's really in my opinion an inappropriate thing to add but don't be surprised when you see people do
it.
OK so the next lecture we're going to go over some easy tools for producing proposals.
I'm going to show you that it's not something you really have to fret about.
It's actually quite easy to put together a complex proposal.
You don't necessarily need design skills yourself.
A lot of people out there have the same problem that you have.
This is the first time you're creating a proposal and there's a lot of really really good tools that
have been made to address this problem.
So the next one we're going to do in a real quick crash course in going to show you what are some of
the good tools out there that are worth using and what are some of your options for getting this done
easily.
All right so in the next lecture.